Add Developer Guides, replace internal.md, CONTRIBUTING.md (#625)
rapidsai/cuspatial: docs/source/developer_guide/library_design.md

# Library Design

cuSpatial has two main components,
the cuSpatial-python package and libcuspatial c++ package.
This article dicusses the design of cuspatial-python,
for information of libcuspatial,
see [libcuspatial developer guide](link) and [c++ API reference](link).
We refer to the python package as `cuspatial` and the c++ package as `libcuspatial` below.

## Overview

At a high level, `cuspatial` has three parts:
- A GPU backed `GeoDataFrame` data structure
- A set of computation APIs

> - A cython API layer

Author: My understanding of python layers is made up of the first two parts in the list. There is a very thin internal layer designed around geodataframe. I'm counting it into the first part as well.

## GPU Accelerated `GeoDataFrame` and `GeoSeries`

Note: since the core data structure of cuspatial shares the same name as that
of `geopandas`.
We refer to geopandas' dataframe object as `geopandas.GeoDataFrame` and to
cuspatial's dataframe object as `GeoDataFrame`.

> Under the hood,
> cuspatial can perform parallel computation on geometry data thanks to its [structure of array](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_array) (SoA) format.
> Specifically,
> cuspatial adopts geoarrow format as the SoA standard.
> Geoarrow is a derived data type from the arrow list type adopting a [`Variable-size List Layout`](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#variable-size-list-layout),
> with the inner-most layer storing the points with a `Fixed-size list layout` array with `size=2`.
> Per definition,
> each increase in geometry complexity (dimension, or multi-geometry) requires an extra level of indirection.
> Geoarrow allows a mixture of geometry types to present in the same column by adopting the [Dense Union Array Layout](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dense-union).
> In cusptial,
> we refer to each level of indirection from highest level to lowest by
> `geometries`, `parts`, `rings` and `coordinates`.
> The first three are integral offset arrays and the last is an floating-point interleaved xy-coordinated array.
> Read [geoarrow format documentation](https://github.com/geopandas/geo-arrow-spec/blob/main/format.md) specification for more detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the hood, cuspatial can perform parallel computation on geometry
data thanks to its
[structure of arrays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_array) (SoA)
format. Specifically, cuspatial adopts geoarrow format. Geoarrow is derived
from the Apache Arrow list type, and it adopts a
[`Variable-size List Layout`](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#variable-size-list-layout),
with the inner-most layer storing the points in a `Fixed-size list layout` array
with `size==2`. 

By definition, each increase in geometry complexity (dimension, or multi-
geometry) requires an extra level of indirection. Geoarrow allows a mixture
of geometry types to be present in the same column by adopting the
[Dense Union Array Layout](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dense-union).
In cuSpatial, we use the following names for the levels of indirection from
highest level to lowest: `geometries`, `parts`, `rings` and `coordinates`. The
first three are integral offset arrays and the last is a floating-point
interleaved xy-coordinate array.

Read the [geoarrow format specification](https://github.com/geopandas/geo-arrow-spec/blob/main/format.md)
for more detail.
```

Author: After the second read, I think the second paragraph on quick overview of the geoarrow features can be broken down into two parts:

```suggestion
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under the hood, cuspatial can perform parallel computation on geometry
data thanks to its
[structure of arrays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_array) (SoA)
format. Specifically, cuspatial adopts geoarrow format. Geoarrow is derived
from the Apache Arrow list type, and it adopts a
[`Variable-size List Layout`](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#variable-size-list-layout),
with the inner-most layer storing the points in a `Fixed-size list layout` array
with `size==2`. 

By definition, each increase in geometry complexity (dimension, or multi-
geometry) requires an extra level of indirection. In cuSpatial, we use the following names for the levels of indirection from
highest level to lowest: `geometries`, `parts`, `rings` and `coordinates`. The
first three are integral offset arrays and the last is a floating-point
interleaved xy-coordinate array.

Geoarrow also allows a mixture
of geometry types to be present in the same column by adopting the
[Dense Union Array Layout](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dense-union).

Read the [geoarrow format specification](https://github.com/geopandas/geo-arrow-spec/blob/main/format.md)
for more detail.
```

> Cuspatial implements partial arrow union array via `GeoColumn` and `GeoMeta`.
> A GeoColumn is a composition of child columns and a `GeoMeta` object.
> The `GeoMeta` owns two arrays that are similar to the types buffer and offsets buffer from dense union.

Reviewer: This paragraph is confusing. I can't figure out what it is trying to tell me.

What does this mean?: "Cuspatial implements partial arrow union array". I can't parse whether it partially implements an Arrow union array, or it fully implements a partial Arrow union array.  What is a "partial arrow union array", and why does cuSpatial need it?

```suggestion
cuSpatial implements partial Arrow union arrays via `GeoColumn` and
`GeoMeta`. A `GeoColumn` is a composition of child columns and a
`GeoMeta` object. The `GeoMeta` owns two arrays that are similar to the
types buffer and offsets buffer from Arrow dense union.
```

Author: > What does this mean?: "Cuspatial implements partial arrow union array". I can't parse whether it partially implements an Arrow union array, or it fully implements a partial Arrow union array. What is a "partial arrow union array", and why does cuSpatial need it?

I meant to say partially implements an arrow union array. Arrow union array type is more like a template - it allows arbitrary type composition. Cuspatial's geocolumn is a specialization of the union array that has 4 types: `point`, `multipoint`, `multilinestrings`, `multipolygons`.

Author: ```suggestion
cuSpatial implements a specialization of Geoarrow dense union format via `GeoColumn` and
`GeoMeta`. A `GeoColumn` is a composition of child columns and a
`GeoMeta` object. The `GeoMeta` owns two arrays that are similar to the
types buffer and offsets buffer from Arrow dense union.
```

```{note} Currently,

> `GeoColumn` only implements four concrete array types: `points`, `multipoints`, `multilinestrings` (named as lines) and `multipolygon` (named as polygons).

Reviewer: Why do you say "named as lines"? We call them multilinestrings everywhere else.

Author: That's how it's called in code. Maybe we should just rename the variable to fix the confusion.

> ```{note} Currently,
> `GeoColumn` only implements four concrete array types: `points`, `multipoints`, `multilinestrings` (named as lines) and `multipolygon` (named as polygons).
> Linestrings and multilinestrings are stored uniformly as multilinestrings in the multilinestrings array.
> Polygons and multipolygons are stored uniformly as multipolygons in multipolygon array.
> Points and multipoints are stored separately in different arrays.
> This is because storing points in a multipoints array requires 50% more storage overhead.
> While this may also be true for linestrings and polygons,
> previous use cases of cuspatial often involves more complex linestrings and polygons,
> and the storage overhead is lower compared to points.
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{note}
Currently, `GeoColumn` only implements four concrete array types: `points`,
`multipoints`, multilinestrings (called `lines`) and multipolygons (called
`polygons`). Linestrings and multilinestrings are stored uniformly as
multilinestrings in the `multilinestrings` array. Polygons and multipolygons are
stored uniformly as multipolygons in the `multipolygons` array.

Points and multipoints are stored separately in different arrays, because
storing points in a multipoints array requires 50% more storage overhead.
While this may also be true for linestrings and polygons, many uses of
cuSpatial involve more complex linestrings and polygons, where the 
storage overhead of multigeometry indirection is lower compared to points.
```
```

> `GeoSeries` and `GeoDataFrame` inherits from `cudf.Series` and `cudf.DataFrame` respectively.
> `Series` and `DataFrame` are all generic `Frame` objects which represents a collection of generic columns.
> cuSpatial extends these cudf objects by allowing `GeoColumn` to present in the frame.
> 
> `GeoSeries` and `GeoDataFrame` are convertible to and from `geopandas`.
> Interoperability between cuspatial, `geopandas` and other data format is maintained in `cuspatial.io` package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GeoSeries` and `GeoDataFrame` inherit from `cudf.Series` and
`cudf.DataFrame` respectively. `Series` and `DataFrame` are both generic
`Frame` objects which represent a collection of generic columns. cuSpatial
extends these cuDF objects by allowing `GeoColumn`s to be present in the
frame.

`GeoSeries` and `GeoDataFrame` are convertible to and from `geopandas`.
Interoperability between cuspatial, `geopandas` and other data formats is
maintained in the `cuspatial.io` package.
```

### UnionArray Compliance

> As previously mentioned,
> cuspatial's `GeoColumn` is an specialization of arrow's `UnionArray`.
> A fundamental addition in data types should be implemented in `cudf` and `GeoColumn` should simply inherits its functionality.
> However,
> `UnionArray` stands distinctly from existing data types in libcudf and requires substantial effort to implement.
> In the interim,
> cuspatial developers should build `GeoColumn` complying to `UnionArray` standards.
> Such effort may be upstreamed to `cudf` when development is more underway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As previously mentioned, cuspatial's `GeoColumn` is a specialization of
Arrow's `UnionArray`. A fundamental addition to cuDF data types should be
implemented in cuDF so that `GeoColumn` can simply inherit its
functionality. However, `UnionArray` stands distinct from existing data types
in libcudf and requires substantial effort to implement. In the interim, 
cuSpatial provides a `GeoColumn` complying to the `UnionArray`
specification. This may be upstreamed to libcudf as it matures.
```

Author: ```suggestion
As previously mentioned, cuspatial's `GeoColumn` is a specialization of
Arrow's dense `UnionArray`. A fundamental addition to cuDF data types should be
implemented in cuDF so that `GeoColumn` can simply inherit its
functionality. However, dense `UnionArray` stands distinct from existing data types
in libcudf and requires substantial effort to implement. In the interim, 
cuSpatial provides a `GeoColumn` complying to the dense `UnionArray`
specification. This may be upstreamed to libcudf as it matures.
```

Author: I just added the "dense" `UnionArray` to make it clear the sparse variant of unionarray isn't planned to be supported.

> ## GIS computation APIs
> 
> Besides the data structure,
> cuspatial maintains a set of computation APIs.
> The computation APIs are organized into several modules.
> All spatial computation modules are further grouped into a `spatial` subpackage.
> Developers are encouraged to use specific names for the module of the function added in the PR.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "Developers are encouraged to use specific names for the module of the
function added in the PR."  What specific names should be used?  Also, it's weird to refer to PRs here in the library design documentation.

```suggestion
## Geospatial computation APIs

In addition to data structures, cuSpatial provides a set of computation APIs.
The computation APIs are organized into several modules. All spatial
computation modules are further grouped into a `spatial` subpackage.
Developers are encouraged to use specific names for the module of the
function added in the PR.
```

Author: This is opposed to using names like `generics.py` for module names. We can make it clear in this paragraph:

```suggestion
## Geospatial computation APIs

In addition to data structures, cuSpatial provides a set of computation APIs.
The computation APIs are organized into several modules. All spatial
computation modules are further grouped into a `spatial` subpackage.
Module names should correspond to a specific computation category,
such as `distance` or `join`. Cuspatial avoids using general category names,
such as `generic`.
```

> ### Legacy and Modern APIs
> 
> For historical reasons,
> cuspatial APIs exposes raw array inputs for users to provide raw geometry coordinate array and offsets.
> Newer APIs should accept a `GeoSeries` or `GeoDataFrame` as input.
> Developers may extract geometry offsets and coordinates via geometry accessors provided,
> such as `GeoSeries.point`, `GeoSeries.multipoint`, `GeoSeries.lines`, `GeoSeries.polygon`.

Reviewer: Why is `GeoSeries.lines` plural while all the others are singular?

```suggestion
### Legacy and Modern APIs

For historical reasons, older cuSpatial APIs expose raw array inputs for
users to provide raw geometry coordinate arrays and offsets. Newer Python
APIs should accept a `GeoSeries` or `GeoDataFrame` as input. Developers
may extract geometry offsets and coordinates via cuSpatial's geometry
accessors such as `GeoSeries.point`, `GeoSeries.multipoint`,
`GeoSeries.lines`, `GeoSeries.polygon`.
```

This point about accessors seems to have nothing to do with legacy vs. modern. Perhaps that should be a separate section?

Author: In fact the accessors are all in plural form:

```suggestion
### Legacy and Modern APIs

For historical reasons, older cuSpatial APIs expose raw array inputs for
users to provide raw geometry coordinate arrays and offsets. Newer Python
APIs should accept a `GeoSeries` or `GeoDataFrame` as input. Developers
may extract geometry offsets and coordinates via cuSpatial's geometry
accessors such as `GeoSeries.points`, `GeoSeries.multipoints`,
`GeoSeries.lines`, `GeoSeries.polygons`.
```

As mentioned in one of the comment above, `lines` should be renamed to `multilinestrings`, `polygons` should be renamed to `multipolygons`.

## Cython Layer

> The lowest layer of cuspatial is its interaction with `libcusptial` via Cython.
> The Cython layer is composed of two components: C++ bindings and Cython wrappers.
> The first component consists of [`.pxd` files](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/tutorial/pxd_files.html),
> Cython declaration files that expose the contents of C++ header files to other Cython files.
> The second component consists of Cython wrappers for this functionality.
> These wrappers are necessary to expose this functionality to pure Python code.
> 
> To interact with the column APIs in `libcuspatial`,
> developers should have basic familarities with `libcudf` objects.
> `libcudf` is built around two principal objects whose names are largely self-explanatory: `column` and `table`.
> `libcudf` also defines corresponding non-owning "view" types `column_view` and `table_view`.
> Both `libcudf` and `libcuspatial` APIs typically accept views and return owning types.
> A `cuspatial` object owns one ore more c++ owning objects,
> the lifetime of these objects are automatically managed by python's reference counting mechanism.
> 
> Similar to `cudf`,
> cython wrappers involves converting a `Column` object into `column_view` object,
> calls the `libcuspatial` API,
> and reconstructs a cudf object from the c++ result.
> By the time code reaches this stage,
> the objects are assumed to be a fully legal input to the `libcuspatial` API,
> therefore the wrapper should not contain additional component besides the above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lowest layer of cuspatial is its interaction with `libcuspatial` via Cython.
The Cython layer is composed of two components: C++ bindings and
Cython wrappers. The first component consists of
[`.pxd` files](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/tutorial/pxd_files.html),
which are Cython declaration files that expose the contents of C++ header
files to other Cython files. The second component consists of Cython
wrappers for this functionality. These wrappers are necessary to expose
this functionality to pure Python code.

To interact with the column-based APIs in `libcuspatial`, developers should
have basic familiarity with `libcudf` objects. `libcudf` is built around two
principal objects whose names are largely self-explanatory: `column` and
`table`. `libcudf` also defines corresponding non-owning "view" types
`column_view` and `table_view`. Both `libcudf` and `libcuspatial` APIs
typically accept views and return owning types. When a `cuspatial` object
owns one ore more c++ owning objects, the lifetime of these objects is
automatically managed by python's reference counting mechanism.

Similar to cuDF, Cython wrappers must convert `Column` objects into
`column_view` objects, call the `libcuspatial` API, and reconstruct a cuDF
object from the c++ result. By the time code reaches this stage, the
objects are assumed to be fully legal inputs to the `libcuspatial` API.
Therefore the wrapper should not contain additional components besides
the above.
```

> besides the above.

Which things above?

Author: This is meant to say the Cython wrapper should not do additional data processing steps besides the three steps above:
convert to C objects, call the API and reconstruct the result.

which are Cython declaration files that expose the contents of C++ header
files to other Cython files. The second component consists of Cython
wrappers for this functionality. These wrappers are necessary to expose
this functionality to pure Python code.

To interact with the column-based APIs in `libcuspatial`, developers should
have basic familiarity with `libcudf` objects. `libcudf` is built around two
principal objects whose names are largely self-explanatory: `column` and
`table`. `libcudf` also defines corresponding non-owning "view" types
`column_view` and `table_view`. Both `libcudf` and `libcuspatial` APIs
typically accept views and return owning types. When a `cuspatial` object
owns one ore more c++ owning objects, the lifetime of these objects is
automatically managed by python's reference counting mechanism.

Similar to cuDF, Cython wrappers must convert `Column` objects into
`column_view` objects, call the `libcuspatial` API, and reconstruct a cuDF
object from the c++ result. By the time code reaches this stage, the
objects are assumed to be fully legal inputs to the `libcuspatial` API.

> Therefore the wrapper should not contain additional components besides
> the above.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, the wrapper should avoid further data processing and be as
simple as possible.
```
